# Low cusp volume verification

This repository contains the verification code for the paper "Hyperbolic 3-manifolds of low cusp volume."
Along with the data, this code provides a proof of Propostions 2.15 and 3.5 of the paper. 

# Installation

There are no dependencies of this code outside of the C++ standard library.
There are several binaries that need to be made from the `src` directory:

```
make rootcat
make verify
make identify
make tests
```
One should run `test_float` from the `bin` directory before any verification code to make sure that your system correctly catchest any overflow and underflow.
To run the proof of Propostion 2.15, from the `bin` direcotry execute:
```
./rootcat ../data/verify | ./verify
```
Note, this process is long and take 10-15 hours to finish.
Similarly, the proof of Propostion 3.5, from the `bin` directory:
```
./rootcat ../data/identify | ./identify
```
This runs in just a few minutes.

For ease of use, script are provided in the scripts directory that perform the above calls alongside some pretty printing.

# Code

## Arithmetic

The arithmetic used in this repository is idenitcal to the one published in "Homotopy hyperbolic 3-manifolds are hyperbolic."
In fact, aside from fixing two minor typos and adding a missing library to `test_float.C`, the following files are identical to the versions published there:
```
Complex.h Complex.C Complex.inline
ACJ.h ACJ.C ACJ.inline
SL2ACJ.h SL2ACJ.C
```
The fixed typos are contained in the patch file `arithmetic.patch`.
Note, in "Homotopy hyperbolic 3-manifolds are hyperbolic," the authors use `CWEB` to generate the source code.
The patch file expects the code generated by `CWEB`, not the actual `.w` file.
The code in this repository already has the patch applied.
For the new code in this repository, we chose not to use `CWEB` as this adds an additonal step and dependency.
Discussion of the details of the code are in the appendix of the main paper.

## Parameter space code

We use the arithmetic above to verify a binary tree, the leaf nodes of which represent (sub)boxes in the parameter space and corresponding eliminaton criteria. See our paper for deals.

### rootcat

This program reads the binary tree as stored in a collection of text `.out` files, or compressed `.out.tar.gz` versions, and prints the tree out to `stdin` in depth-first format.
This data format was chosen because the dataset is quite large.
Each internal node is represented by an `X` and each leaf node includes an elinimation criterion that will be checked by `verify` or `identify`.

The code for `rootcat` is entirely contained in `rootcat.c`.
It is written in `C` and should catch any and all reading errors if the data is corrupt or the tree is incomplete.

### verify

This program verifies Proposition 2.15.
It expects to recieve the complete data tree in depth-first order (e.g. the output of `rootcat`) via `stdin`.
At a leaf node, the program will take the binary coodrinate of the node and use it to construct the parameters corresponding to that box.
See the relevant code in `box.h` and `box.c`.
Validity of this code is discussed in the paper.

The program then rigorously validates the the condition encoded in the leaf node elimination criterion holds over the entire box.
Conditions 0-6 are boundary conditions that check if the box lies entirely outside of the valid parameter space on interest.
Lettered conditions are of the form `t(words)` where `t` encodes the type of condition and `words` is a word or list of words.
There are four types of lettered contitions, see the paper for details.
The code for verifying these conditions can be found in: `elimination.h` and `elimination.c`.

### identify

This program verifies Proposition 3.5.
It works just like verify but test an extra `variety` condition for identifying relators.

### tests

These programs checks whether your system correctly report that roundoff error has occured.
Note, the roundoff checking function has been updated from the version in "Homotopy hyperbolic 3-manifolds are hyperbolic" to only include testing for x64 machines. 
